# Course material for MAT321 - Spring 2023

Course Description:

I like David Bindel's description of his own numerical analysis class: "Scientists, engineers, mathematicians, and computer scientists use models to describe everything from the ringing of bells to the evolution of animal populations to the relationships between web pages. We turn to computers to help us analyze all but the simplest such models; but how can an inherently discrete device such as a computer solve continuous problems quickly and reliably? This is the fundamental question we address in (...)" MAT321!

More practically, we cover the fundamental algorithms of computational mathematics: matrix decompositions, eigenvalue iterations, iterative linear algebra, optimization, interpolation and numerical integration. We analyze the stability and accuracy of these algorithms, and explore their applications to image processing, data science and the numerical solution of differential equations. 

This year, by popular demand from students, the class was in Python. In lecture we cover mostly the theory of the algorithms, often illustrated by numerical experiments. The precepts are mostly reserved for programming focuses tasks. In problem set, we cover applications and derive and implement other interesting algorithms.

Problem sets:
- [Finite difference methods, numerical linear algebra, image alignment](problem_sets/hw2/hw2.ipynb) [hw2.html](problem_sets/hw2/hw2.html) 
- [Matrix equations, displacement rank, deblurring images](problem_sets/hw3/hw3.ipynb) [hw3.html](problem_sets/hw3/hw3.html) 
- [Eigenvalue problems, Bartels-Stewart, Poisson's equation](problem_sets/hw3/hw2.ipynb) [hw4.html](problem_sets/hw4/hw4.html) 
- [The FFT, Chebyshev polynomials, preconditioning Krylov methods, ADI](problem_sets/hw5/hw5.ipynb) [hw5.html](problem_sets/hw5/hw5.html) 


Lecture topics:
- Lecture 1: Introduction, rootfinding, bisection
- Lecture 2: Newton's method, secant method, fixed point iterations
- Lecture 3: Floating point arithmetic
- Lecture 4: Intro to numerical linear algebra: complexity, matrices, vectors
- Lecture 5: Matrix norms, singular values
- Lecture 6: The singular value decomposition, the eigenvalue decomposition
- Lecture 7: The QR decomposition, Gram-Schmidt
- Lecture 8: QR by Householder reflection
- Lecture 9: Least-squares problem, ill-conditioning and regularization
- Lecture 10: The LU decomposition, pivoting
- Lecture 11: The Cholesky decomposition, exploiting matrix structure
- Lecture 12: More stuctured solves
- Lecture 13: Intro to eigenvalue problems
- Lecture 14: Power iterations
- Lecture 15: Subspace iterations, the QR algorithm
- Lecture 16: Shifted QR, the Arnoldi iteration
- Lecture 17: Iterative linear algebra, Krylov subspace methods
- Lecture 18: The Conjugate-Gradient method
- Lecture 19: Polynomial interpolation
- Lecture 20: Numerical quadrature
- Lecture 21: Approximation theory
- Lecture 22: Initial value problems, Euler's method
- Lecture 23: Runge-Kutta and beyond
- Lecture 24: Recap, the top 10 algorithms


